# MUM sIUD: Mammalian Uterine Monitoring Smart Intrauterine Device

The intrauterine device (IUD) is a stigmatized, yet highly effective contraceptive device. The simple T-shaped design has been the FDA approved standard design with a copper or hormonal (levonorgestrel) contraceptive method in the United States. Many people with uteruses are often deterred from getting an IUD from mention of the painful insertion process and risk of migration, perforation, accidental removal, and breakage upon removal. Many of these risks have low incidence but still affect the consciousness of many people with uteruses considering IUD usage. Additionally, there have been a high number of reports of painful insertion experience and uncomfortable removal process. The insertion process is painful because of speculum usage to wedge the vagina open, forceps usage to pull the cervix allowing the uterus to become parallel with the IUD insertion tool to reduce risk of perforation, and the insertion tool passing through the narrow diameter cervix. The removal process is uncomfortable because of speculum usage to wedge vagina open and the IUD arms bending against the cervical canal as it is being tugged by a thread. The issues have been identified alongside the increasing awareness and placed importance on sexual and reproductive health have been integrated into the design of the smart IUD. 

The sIUD is indicated to monitor pH, temperature, and uterine tilt while implanted. Uterine and vaginal pH is important because when the pH is no longer within the usual range of 3.8 - 5.0, there is a risk of an overgrowth of bacteria and pelvic inflammatory disease. With a way to monitor the pH, patients will be given warning when their natural pH levels are no longer within the safe range and know to seek medical assistance to prevent both bacteria overgrowth and pelvic inflammatory disease. The basal body temperature can be measured within the uterus as well, with the normal temperature sitting around 96째F - 98째F, and temperature after ovulation raising a couple degrees to 97째F - 99째F. Temperature monitoring can alert the user to abnormally high body temperatures experienced when ill, and can also be used to track ovulation cycles, as the temperature will spike in the uterus after ovulation. Finally, uterine tilt can be measured to enlighten users as to whether they have a tilted uterus or not. This is a common occurrence with one in five women having a tilted uterus. Anteversion occurs when the uterus is tilted towards the front of the abdomen and is considered a normal position with no effect on fertility. Retroversion occurs when the uterus is tilted back towards the spine and can cause fertility issues. It is common that no symptoms occur due to a tipped uterus, so this enables users to be aware of any possible issues with various uterus tilts. 

Future work includes working on the software interface for the device, design and development of a mock uterine environment with the assistance of Amy Degenkolb and Donald Lee from Novo Cuff and Kristin Meyers from Colombia University, manufacturing of the prototype, and testing of the prototype. By mid-June, the goal is to have a fully functional prototype at 3x scale available to be evaluated within the mock uterine environment for efficacy.
  
Full final prototype demonstration can be found [here](https://cpslo-my.sharepoint.com/:v:/r/personal/ewagne02_calpoly_edu/Documents/MUM%20sIUD/FinalPrototypeDemo.mp4?csf=1&web=1&nav=eyJyZWZlcnJhbEluZm8iOnsicmVmZXJyYWxBcHAiOiJPbmVEcml2ZUZvckJ1c2luZXNzIiwicmVmZXJyYWxBcHBQbGF0Zm9ybSI6IldlYiIsInJlZmVycmFsTW9kZSI6InZpZXciLCJyZWZlcnJhbFZpZXciOiJNeUZpbGVzTGlua0RpcmVjdCJ9fQ&e=XXRFG4).
